# GB-SC18

Resistance to chemotherapy and molecularly targeted therapies is a major factor in limiting the effectiveness of cancer therapies. In many cases resistance can be linked to genetic changes in target proteins, either pre-existing or evolutionarily selected during treatment. Key to overcoming this challenge is the understanding of the molecular determinants of drug binding. The key physical parameters determining drug effectiveness are the binding free energy and the residence time of a ligand. Using molecular simulation we can gain insights into both of these quantities, which can inform both stratified or personal treatment regimes and drug development.

The level of sampling required to obtain accurate and reproducible binding affinities and kinetic information can only efficiently be obtained in a timely fashion through the use of ensembles of many simulations executed on HPC resources. In state of the art calculation techniques each simulation may, in fact, consist of a complex multi-stage workflow. The resulting trajectories reveal in atomic detail how interactions and protein behaviour change as a result of mutations, and account for the molecular basis of drug efficacy. 

This a collaborative project, just getting underway, that will study a wide range of cancer drugs and candidate ligands in order to support personalised clinical decision making based on genome sequencing and drug discovery, using automated workflows underpinned by ensemble-based high performance computing methods running at unprecedented scales. In order to do this, we are developing the High-Throughput Binding Affinity Calculator (HT-BAC) which is the integration of the BAC -- Binding Affinity Calculator -- developed by the Centre for Computational Science at UCL, and RADICAL-Cybertools (from the RADICAL Laboratory at Rutgers University). BAC represents the state-of-the-art in defining biomedically important workflows for rapid, accurate, precise and reliable free energy based binding affinity calculations. RADICAL-Cybertools are a suite of functional components that support the interoperable and scalable execution of multiple simulations.

HT-BAC provides the ability to separate the "setting-up" (i.e., defining) of a workflow from its "execution". The two components (BAC and Ensemble-Toolkit) separate the two concerns. HT-BAC will use well defined Ensemble-Toolkit APIs to support multiple distinct workflows of increasing sophistication. Starting with a "bag -of-tasks" it will evolve to support adaptive sampling. The runtime system of RADICAL-Cybertools (which is known as RADICAL-Pilot) is being engineered to support up to 100,000 ensemble members; successful execution of these calculations also depends on new capabilities in the Open MPI library which fully recognises, for the first time, the importance of running MPI applications comprised of such very large numbers of individual sub-components.

Co-PIs on the project are Peter Coveney (UCL) and Shantenu Jha (Rutgers).

We are particularly focused on the ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases (which include EGFR) and the estrogen receptor (ER). The former class of proteins are over-expressed in many cancers and are consequently the target of many drug discovery programs. The richness of data available for these systems make them ideal candidates for us to investigate binding properties and the selectivity of different drug classes. Estrogen receptors (ERs) are over-expressed in around 70 % of breast cancer cases and are major targets for therapies. Genome sequencing has identified a number of mutations associated with drug resistance that reduces treatment efficacy. Mutations at three loci within the receptor (residues 536, 537 and 538), all close to the ligand binding site, have been characterised as primary mutations driving resistance with tens of further sequence changes also implicated. The interaction of these mutations is not yet fully understood with some co-expressed pairs such as Asp538Gly and Ser463Pro seemingly interacting to enhance resistance despite being located far from one another (approximately 26 Angstrom) in the protein. We will investigate the interplay of these mutations and how they impact protein structure and dynamics, and how these changes affect drug binding. This is a particularly challenging case as it is believed that one of the primary influences of resistance mutations is in changing the balance between active and inactive conformations of the protein which involve large scale rearrangements of the structure.

